And up first, I'm delighted to introduce
my friend Jim Fan.
Uh Jim leads the embodied autonomous
research uh group at Nvidia, otherwise
known as Nvidia robotics.
Um
I think that robot robots are just one
of the most thrilling things that's
going to happen. Uh a car basically is a
big robot, but I'm excited for robots
can go beep boop and lift things for us.
And so, Jim was Jim was a standout at
last year's AI Ascent, and we're
delighted to have you back.
Thanks, [applause] everyone. Thanks.
So, it was a summer day in 2016.
Actually, right in this office that
we're sitting in.
>> [snorts]
>> There's a guy in shiny leather jacket,
you know, big biceps, hurling this large
metal tray.
And on this
large piece of metal, he wrote, "To Elon
and the OpenAI team, to the future of
computing and humanity, I present you
the world's first DGX-1."
So, that was the first time I met
Jensen.
And as any good intern would do, I
rushed to getting line to sign my name
on it.
So, can you spot it, my name?
It's here. And can you spot another?
That's Andre, right there.
So, Andre, we're going to the Computer
History Museum.
I feel like a dinosaur.
You know, back then, I had no clue what
I was signing up for.
And then, no one can describe what
happened next better than Ilya himself.
If you believe in deep learning, deep
learning
will believe in you.
And oh boy, did deep learning believe in
all of us big time.
Three step functions, six years.
That's how all it took to bring us here
today.
The first tick, GPT-3,
pre-training.
Next token prediction is really about
learning the rules of grammar, the shape
of language. It's about simulating how
thoughts and code and strings in general
should unfold.
2022 Instruct GPT
supervised fine-tuning aligned the
simulation to do useful work.
01 reasoning
using reinforcement learning to surpass
imitation learning and finally auto
research accelerating the whole loop
beyond what's humanly possible.
So, as Andre said
all the labs are getting to the final
boss fight.
So, for LLMs
they're in the thick of the end game.
And honestly, I'm very jealous.
Look at how happy Andre was, big smile
on his on his face.
The LLM folks
are having the party of their lifetime.
They're speed running AGI on mystical
creatures literally called mythos.
So, why can't robotics get a piece of
fun?
So, as any self-respecting scientist
would do
I copy homework and I give it a new
name.
I call it the great parallel.
So, instead of simulating strings
can we simulate next physical world
state?
And then we can align through action
fine-tuning
onto a thin slice of that simulation
that matters for real robots.
And we let reinforcement learning carry
the last mile.
And that's it.
The great parallel copying the LLM
success.
If you can't beat them, join them.
So, please join me in a new episode
robotics the end game.
I'm sorry, I just couldn't resist. Nano
bananas too good. Thanks, Demis.
So, how do we play the end game? It
boils down to two things, model strategy
and data strategy.
Let's look at the model first.
The last 3 years
were dominated by VLAs or visual
language action models and models like
PaLM and Goot fall in this category.
So, we assume that the pre-training is
done by a VLA
and we simply graph an action head on
top of it.
But really, if you think about these
models, they're LVAs because the most
amount of parameters are dedicated to
language. So, language is first-class
citizen followed by vision and action.
And by design, VOAs are great at
encoding knowledge and nouns, but not so
much at physics and verbs. It's kind of
head-heavy in the wrong places.
This is my favorite example from the
original VOA paper.
Move the Coke can to a picture of Taylor
Swift. Yes, it has not seen Taylor Swift
before. Yes, it's able to generalize.
But this is not quite the pre-training
ability that we're looking for.
So, what's the second pre-training
paradigm?
And I always thought that it would be
something glorious.
Unfortunate, it turns out
that this is AI video slop that we call.
You know, I can watch these cats playing
banjo on security cam all day. It's peak
internet.
But really,
look at this. No one can take this
seriously
>> [laughter]
>> until we realize that these video models
are learning to simulate next world
state internally.
So, these are some rollouts from VEO3.
You can see that the models, they pick
up gravity, buoyancy, lighting,
reflection, refraction all by
themselves. None of this is coded in.
Physics emerge by predicting the next
blob of pixels at scale.
And even visual planning emerges.
Look at how VEO solves these mazes.
It solves them by running simulation
forward in pixel space.
And draw attention to the lower right
corner here. This is my favorite
example. Let's watch. And you blink if
you miss how VEO3 solves this one.
>> [laughter]
>> It's super smart. You know, VEO3 figures
out that if you're not looking, geometry
is optional.
I call this physics law.
So, how do we make these world models
useful?
Well,
we do action fine-tuning.
We align the superposition of all
possible future states and [snorts]
collapse that onto a thin slice that
matters for real robots.
Introducing Dreamer.
It's a new type of policy model
that dreams a couple seconds into the
future and acts accordingly.
And you know that motor actions, they're
high-dimensional continuous signals.
So, that looks just like pixels.
We can render it at the same time as we
render the videos. So, Dreamer jointly
decodes the next world states and next
actions.
And as a result, it's able to zero-shot
solve tasks
and verbs that it has never seen in
training.
And as a robot executes, we can
visualize what it's dreaming about.
And the correlation is very tight.
If the video prediction works, the
action works.
If the video hallucinates, the action
fails.
So, once again, vision and action are
now first-class citizens.
And we have a lot of fun with Dreamer.
So, we just roll the robot around in our
lab and then type random things into the
prompt box.
And of course, Dreamer is not going to
get all of these tasks 100% robust, but
it's kind of like GPT-2.
It's trying to get the shape of the
motion correct in every case.
So, Dreamer is our first step towards
open-ended, open-vocabulary prompting
for robotics.
And we [snorts] call this new type of
model world action models or WAM.
So, let's all take a moment of silence
for our dear friend VOS.
They served us well. Rest in peace.
Long live world action models.
>> [clears throat]
>> And next, data strategy.
This is Nvidia's chief scientist, Bill
Dally, operating teleoperation inside
our lab.
And given his salary, I think this is by
far the most expensive teleop trajectory
ever collected in our data set.
The past 3 years have been dominated by
teleoperation. It's the golden era.
All right, VR headsets,
extremely optimized
latency for streaming, and these complex
rigs that look like medieval torture
devices.
You know, so much investment in
industry, so much pain and suffering.
And yet, for teleop, it's upper bounded
by 24 hours per robot per day, the
fundamental physical limit.
And actually, who am I kidding? It's
more like 3 hours per robot per day, and
only when the robot god is merciful,
because they throw tantrums all the
time.
So, how can we do better?
Well, how about this?
You just wear the robot hand on your own
hand.
So, this is called UMI, or universal
manipulation interface, and it's a
deceptively simple idea.
You wear the robot actuator on your hand
and directly collect the data as humans,
while getting the rest of the robot body
out of the loop.
Yet, I will say UMI is perhaps one of
the greatest papers ever written in
robotics data,
and it spawned two unicorn startups.
On the left hand side is Joles improving
this design, so you can wear the gripper
here, and on the right hand side, Sunday
made these three-finger data gloves.
So, last year, we took a one step
further.
We designed this exoskeleton that has a
one-to-one mapping with five-finger
dexterous robot hands, and we call it
Dex-UMI.
Let's look at it in action.
On the left,
the human directly collecting the data
always the fastest.
On the right, look at how difficult
teleop is.
Right? The human operator, here one of
our most skilled PhDs, he has to align
very carefully, right? And then it's
super slow. Also, the success rate is
very low as well.
And in the middle, you just wear this
exoskeleton and you collect data
directly.
And we train a robot policy on this
data.
So, here what you see is a fully
autonomous
rollout of a policy that's trained on
zero teleoperation data.
So, we're able to break the curse of 24
hours per robot per day and see how
happy these robots are because they no
longer need to be in the loop for data
collection.
So, is this the answer? Have we solved
scaling for robotics?
Anyone driving Tesla or Waymo here?
Anyone?
Right?
You know, when you're driving,
you're actually contributing to the
biggest physical data flywheel.
And the beauty is you don't even feel it
during FSD because the data upload is an
ambient process.
Yet, wearing these old me or data
wearables, it's still cumbersome, right?
It's intrusive. It's not as seamless as
just driving to work.
So, we need
an FSD equivalent.
The data collection needs to get out of
the way, fade into the background so we
can capture the full glory of human
dexterity across all walks of lives,
across all labors of economic value.
So, we're going all in on human
egocentric videos that come with these
detailed annotations like hand position
tracking and dense language annotations.
Introducing Ego Scale.
Where 99.9%
of the training that goes into this is
based on human egocentric videos.
And the result is an end-to-end policy
that maps directly from the camera
pixels here to 22 degrees of freedom
high dexterity robot hands.
What you see here is fully autonomous.
We pre-train Ego-Exo on 21K hours of
in-the-wild egocentric human data
with zero robot data whatsoever.
And during pre-training, we predict
these hand joints and wrist poses.
Then action fine-tuning, we collect only
50 hours of high precision mocap data
gloves and 4 hours of teleop.
That's 4 hours of teleop.
Less than 0.1%
of our training mix.
And with this, Ego-Exo is able to
generalize to these very dexterous tasks
like sorting card
or manipulating syringe,
right? Over transferring the liquid, you
know, someday we might have robot nurses
at home. Might as well try this.
And for these tasks, it takes only one
shot demonstration at test time to learn
different shirt folding strategies.
And perhaps the most fascinating finding
from the paper
is that we discovered this neural
scaling law
for dexterity.
It's a very clean relationship between
the amount of hours we put into
pre-training and the optimal validation
loss. In fact, it's a clean log-linear
mathematical equation.
6 years after the original neural
scaling law for language models.
So, if we put all of these data
strategies on this chart, X axis is
alignment to the robot hardware, Y axis
is scalability, this is what it looks
like. Teleop, the least scalable. Data
wearables, you can go up to hundreds of
thousands of hours.
And egocentric video, if we're able to
spin the FSD flywheel, easily 10 million
hours in the next year or so.
And if we draw a line here, everything
to the left of this line is the
paradigm, sensorized human data.
So, let me make a few predictions.
In the next year or two, we'll see
Teleop dropping and dropping to almost
negligible amount.
And then, there will be an ensemble of
data wearables custom-designed for
different hardware and use cases.
And finally, the main diet for robotics
will be egocentric videos.
So, a moment of silence for our dear
friend Teleop. You have served us well.
Rest in peace. Long live sensorized
human data.
Are we done with the data strategy yet?
Did you notice I put two rings on data
strategy?
What's the outer ring here?
All the old and frontier labs
have spent significant budget now on
acquiring millions of coding
environments to do reinforcement
learning.
So, robotics is the same. We're in
urgent need to scale up environments.
And of course, you can always
do reinforcement learning directly on
the real robot.
So, in our lab, we use RL to push
certain tasks to almost 100% success
rate, so you can do these continuous
execution for hours on end.
You know, it's kind of therapeutic to
see these robots assembling GPUs just by
themselves. Or as a wise man would say,
"Good boy, this task has been approved
by my boss."
Yet, we can't get [snorts] to 1 million
environments because that would require
1 million robots if you do it the
previous way.
So, we need a better way.
Here, let's say you take an iPhone
picture
and you can pass it through this 3D
world scan pipeline to extract all the
objects and then automatically
synthesize them again inside a classical
physics simulator. So, all these objects
are actually interactive after the scan.
And then, you can augment this
infinitely in simulation with variations
that we call digital cousins.
So now, iPhone basically become
a pocket world scanner.
In this process that we call real to sim
to real, and in this way, we have a
scalable way to port the physical world
into the digital world.
But still this method relies on a
classical
graphics engine. Can we do better?
Introducing
Dream Dojo.
So, it's our spin on video world model
and turning them into full-fledged
neural simulators.
Dream Dojo takes us input these
continuous action signals and outputs
the next RGB frames as well as sensor
states in real time.
Not a single pixel you see here is real.
And Dream Dojo is able to capture and
learn the mechanics of different robots
through a purely data-driven approach.
There's no physics equation, no graphics
engine involved in this process.
So, the new post-training paradigm for
robotics is a massively parallel RL
system
that runs on a few real robot stations,
a bunch of graphics cores running world
scans, and heavy inference compute
running world models.
Or, as this equation goes, compute now
equals environment now equals data. Or,
as a wise man would say,
the more you buy, the more you save.
And this message has been approved by my
boss.
So, that's it. Putting it together,
the great parallel that robotics will
follow. And it's happening as we speak.
And we're looking at the beginning of
the end game.
You guys play the video game
Civilization?
Still my favorite.
I like to think of my research as
unlocking game achievements on the
civilizational technology tree.
>> [clears throat]
>> And there are three more achievements to
unlock for robotics, and then we're
done.
I can retire, and I can't wait for that.
The first
is passing the physical Turing test.
Across a wide range of activities, you
cannot tell the difference between a
human doing a task or a robot doing it.
Maybe not drunk humans, but
you know.
Physical Turing test is about unit
energy in and unit labor out.
And just by judging at the sexy pose of
this robot, I think the work is cut out
for us.
So, maybe it's 2 to 3 years away.
And next, physical API.
You have a whole fleet of robots,
and they can be configured just like any
other software using APIs and command
lines, orchestrated someday by Opus 9.0.
And if we have this physical API, we'll
be able to realize lights-out factories.
Those are essentially printers of atoms.
They take us input design in markdown
files, and then output fully assembled
products, completely autonomous.
Or these wet labs
that automate scientific discoveries in
chemistry,
biology, and medicine.
And the final stop, physical auto
research. When the robots start to
design, improve, and build the next
iteration of themselves, far beyond
what's humanly possible.
So, you might ask, is this too science
fiction? Like, are we going to see this
in our lifetime?
Well,
it took the AI community
14 years
to go from the first forward pass of
AlexNet in 2012,
a model that barely recognized cat
versus dog,
to AI ascent today, 2026, where we talk
about agentic auto research.
And let's just add another 14 years. How
about that?
2026 is right in the middle of 2012 and
2040.
And technology does not advance
linearly. It advances exponentially.
So, [snorts] I can say with 95%
certainty that we'll get to the end of
the end game,
the end of the technology tree,
by 2040.
And we'll still be all We'll still be
young.
If you believe in robotics, robotics
will believe in you.
And to all of us here,
sitting here,
I think our generation
was born too late to explore the Earth
and too early to explore the stars, but
we are born just in time to solve
robotics.
Thank you.
>> [applause]
[applause]